Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lobs, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Sigmund Benski. He is
Emeritus RL Knela Professor of Romance Languages and Literatures
at the University of Notre Dame and also. The
professor of Italian emeritus at the University of Cambridge,
and today we're going to focus a lot on
Dante and his Divine Comedy or Comedy as we're
going to get into. So Zig, welcome to the
show. It's a huge pleasure to have you
on. Thank you, Ricardo. It's a, you know, it's
a pleasure and also it's an intrigue, you know,
to be with you, but it's also an intriguing
experience, I'll be honest with you.
OK, so let's get into it. So, I, I
mean, as I, as I've already made a reference
or alluded to in my introduction, uh, it seems
that the original title of Dante's Divine Comedy was
not exactly the Divine Comedy, right? Tell us about
that.
Now, the, the original title, as far as we're
aware. Uh, IS comedy, just simply the in, uh,
Florentine of the time it was comedia with the
stress on the final IA, while in it's modern
Italian it's comedia, uh, and we know it's comedia
because Dante uses it in rhymes, so we know
from the other rhyme words that the pronunciation is.
The, the one that I've mentioned, and now the,
the title comedy immediately caused considerable perplexity, uh. And
because nowhere does Dante explicitly explain why he's using
that term. And precise and precisely on account of
the confusion that it caused, the bewilderment, you know,
the there were even reactions, and I paraphrase in
a slightly humorous way, but you know what that
that reader said, and we have a lot of
records of contemporary readers because the poem generated a
huge commentary tradition. Uh, FROM we suspect it may
have been even already during Dante's own life, the
latter years of Dante's life, but certainly within a
year or two after his death in 1321, and
some readers said, well, this is a great poem,
but the title is pretty rubbish, as I said,
that's my paraphrase of what they wrote. Uh, AND
indeed. The reason we think why the epithet Divina
was added, and it wasn't added until the 16th
century, 1555 in fact, in one of the printed
in a Venetian printed edition of that year, is
precisely as, you know, further clear evidence that people
were confused, dissatisfied, perplexed by the title. And by
adding the epithet divine, which Very easily connects with
the subject matter of the poem since it's a
poem that it's a religious poem in which religious
issues of Christian culture of the time sort of
are present just about on every page of the
poem and it's a poem that recounts a journey
of an individual who goes via the three realms
of the of the afterlife, health, purgatory, and paradise,
and in order to finally achieve union with God,
which of course is an extraordinary claim to make,
whether then or now. Now, there are various theories
why we think Dante used the term. Comedy to
define the poem, uh, the gene, there is almost
universal consensus that we need to look in terms
of medieval theories of literature, uh, and despite the
fact that in Until fairly recently, there was a
view that the Middle Ages was bereft of literary
theory and criticism, this is in fact a major
mistake, er, reflection on literature beginning with the Bible
was everywhere in medieval culture, and they had a
sophisticated system for the analysis of texts. And this
in very simple terms, the system tended to divide
all literary texts into three categories, tragedy, comedy, and
then a third category which was normally satire, but
it could also be other sort of super genres
because within these categories, different varieties of texts would
be included. Now the thing to note immediately is
that the use in the Middle Ages and indeed
before the Middle Ages and also subsequently into the
Renaissance and beyond was the these terms did not
have the meanings that with which we associate nowadays
so comedy was not necessarily something humorous, which is
the way we would respond to the term. Now,
the complications that arise is that, as I'm sure
will emerge later in our discussion, the commedia is.
Without doubt, one of the most experimental and innovative
works of the Western tradition, and it is a
work that on the one hand challenges that tradition,
but on the other hand uses traditional terminology in
order to clarify what the poet is doing, because
essentially Dante's aim was to Not to, in a
sense, the way in which some of the 20th
century avant-garde movements worked as a total rejection of
the tradition. Dante didn't Dante wanted to innovate within
the tradition and to be recognized as an innovator
in terms of the tradition. So this is what
one of the problems that possibly the major problems
associated with the term comedy is that comedy was
considered to be a sort of sorry, the way
in which the that tripartite distinction that I mentioned
worked was that each of these categories, let's call
them genres, the Middle Ages would have called them
styles. Uh, EACH of them had its own subject
matter, its own vocabulary. Its own rhetoric and that
fundamentally, there shouldn't be contamination between the tragic and
the comic, the tragic and the comic and the
satirical. And this was something that was inculcated in
manuals, in education, etc. THAT there was some room
for flexibility and that, you know, but fundamentally that
was the basic premise, uh, upon which medieval thinking
about literature, but also medieval writing sort of function
and comedy was perceived to, To to find itself
with its own constrained set of subject matter, language,
etc. Now, the problem that arises is that one
of the what characterizes the commedia as one of
the characteristics is that it employs not only all
three styles, all three genres within a single text,
but it also, especially at the linguistic level, introduces
vocabulary that would not have been considered as part
of literary discourse. So why use the term comedy?
In very simple terms, comedy out of the three
styles tragedy, comedy, satire, was, when one looks at
the definitions that were current and available, is the
most flexible of the three. So what Dante's using
comedy as, he's saying he uses it as a
kind of We believe sort of Prompt, you know,
to his readers to to ask themselves why comedy.
And the, the, the answer I believe is that
because I'm trying to point to you that if
we're thinking about this in language and terminology that
you understand. I I'm suggesting, look how formally flexible
my poem is. Mhm.
Right, so I would like to ask you before
we go into questions surrounding uh the figure of
Ve more generally in the history of our Western
tradition, Western literature. I would like to ask you
a few questions about the poem itself and how
it progresses. So when it comes to the hell
or inferno part. Um, I mean, uh, of course
there's the circles of hell, and, uh, they include
scenes like lust, gluttony, greed, wrath, heresy, violence, fraud,
and treachery. Um, HOW do you look at this
sort of, let's say, progression through the circles of
hell? Do you think that, uh, dentists structured hell
that way? To, uh, tell people that, um. The,
the sins that, that you can find at the
lower levels are worse than the ones you can
find at the upper levels.
Yes, exactly, yeah, it's very, the poem is very
carefully organized. All three parts of the afterlife are
structured in very sophisticated ways, and indeed we continue
to discover sort of, you know, complexities. Even now,
so it's not just that, you know, there's something
that's immediately accessible, which is the organization of the
sins, essentially, as Virgil Dante's guide explained in Inferno
11. Uh, IS fundamentally based not on Christian principles
but actually on pagan ones, on, to be precise,
on pagan ethical systems, primarily Aristotle's ethics, so the
sins, but also, Uh, there's a Ciceronian element to
the organization of the sins. Now, Dante doing this,
moving from the sins, let's say, of incontinence, the
sins that involve our passions. uh THE way it's
struck and progressively moving down to sins that more
and more involve our intellect to our actual ration,
the use of our reason in order to see
it to sin, such as fraud and Treachery, as
you correctly, as you correctly said, those, we can
see how they map onto pagan ethical notions. Now
what Dante's doing in that, in itself it's not
surprising because since the ever greater influence through the
12th century through the 13th century and into the
14th century of Aristotle and pagan moral thinking, what
Dante was doing fits in with what, you know,
many theologians, philosophers, writers, thinkers, etc. WERE doing at
the time, showing the demonstrating the correlations. Between Christian
thought and pagan thought, especially in matter of ethics.
What is astonishing, what is very different is if
you go and read or just consult quickly the
extensive literature, the on accounts of the afterlife that
were very popular in throughout the Middle Ages and
in particular in the later Middle Ages. We do
not find any account of hell or more generally
of the afterlife that is. Constructed in a sophisticated
a manner as Dante's afterlife, including hell, nor do
they use that in, in the instance of Inferno,
a systematic application of pagan ethics. Now, What, why
is Dante drawing on pagan ethics? I, I hope
I've explained that there was a cultural context which
legitimated that, but also it's part of a much
broader investigation of which the most obvious representative is
Virgil himself, who acts as a guide, a pagan
poet who acts as a guide through two parts
of the Christian afterlife. Is that one of the
things, many things that Dante is doing in the
poem is to explore the rela the interrelationship between
pagan and Christian culture. Now I should also add
briefly that in fact, and this is one of
the things that we've increasingly understood more recently, when
we've stepped back from simply basing ourselves on Virgil's
lesson where he explains the organization of Inferno. In
Inferno 11 is that in fact there are significant
Christian elements within the organization of hell. So, for
instance, when Dante arrives in Malebolge, the circle of
of fraud, we now recognize that that division which
is divided into 10 subdivisions, connects with Christian reflection
upon sins and in particular, A a certain type
of category of sins which from about the 12th
century onwards had become increasingly debated and influential, and
these are the sins of the tongue, i.e., sins
which are predicated on the use of language, and
you can immediately appreciate the correlation between language and
reason.
Mhm. Right, I think that one important thing to
refer here is that in Dante's Inferno, uh, we
find people that, uh, I mean, uh, to understand
why they're there, we have to look at the
text in a historical context because for example we
can find there. Uh, HOMOSEXUAL people, atheists, people who
commit suicide who we nowadays, or at least many
of us nowadays, uh, wouldn't, uh, condemn, uh, at
least in terms of those characteristics.
Yeah, absolutely, I, I very strongly believe and much
of my research is predicated on. And trying to
understand what Dante is saying in terms of the
medieval context, for me that's fundamental and. Uh, THERE
aren't any atheists as far as we know in
the in in the Inferno or anywhere else if
I, if I may just correct you. What we
have is a is a group of souls whom
Dante claims do not believe in the immortality of
the soul, which is these, these are the heretics,
which is quite different from atheism. One can believe
in God but not believe in the immortality of
the soul. That, I, I think that's actually quite
important because. Uh, WHILST certainly there were within, you
know, especially the university culture of the 13th and
14th century, that. Thinkers who. Let's say their views
were problematic, including on whether or not the soul
survived. There is no suggestion that any of these
figures, you know, actually denied the existence of God.
In fact, quite the opposite. Uh, AND yeah, and
absolutely we need to judge Dante's view of suicide,
of, Uh, ho, you know, sexual sins of a
certain type, etc. OR sexual behavior or sexual orientation,
etc. NOT by imposing our own value system, we
can of course, compare and contrast the two, but
in order to understand the nature of Dante's treatment,
We have to consider it in terms of what
the attitudes were at the time, and there are
a number of scholars who know a lot more
about these matters than I do, authoritative scholars who
have suggested that in fact, Dante's attitudes were, and
again I'm going to use a term anachronistically, you
know, were more liberal on these matters than those
of, let's say call it the majority opinion.
Mhm, THAT, that's very interesting. Uh, AND then in
purgatory, I mean, as he goes through, um, as
he goes up Mount Purgatory, what we find there
are simply the seven deadly sins, correct? I mean,
it's pride, envy, wrath, sloth, greed, gluttony, and lust,
and again I imagine that there's a sort of
progression here from the The gravest sin to the
least grave sin, I
imagine that that's, that is absolutely correct. However, the
whole issue of the structure of the mountain, because
in the second canticle, uh, Purgatorio, uh, we actually,
it's a journey up a mountain and only. Uh,
The central part of the mountain is actually purgatory
itself, i.e., Purgatory proper. There is a pre-purgatory that
is explored in the first nine cantos of that
of Purgatorio. Then there's a central part which is
divided according to the seven capital vices, and then
the, the final part for. The transition occurs in
Canto 27, actually takes place in the Garden of
Eden, so part of the journey is a return
to that state of spiritual innocence that had characterized
that Adam and Eve before they, they sinned. So
again, you can begin to see how complex and
sophisticated the system is that Dante, that it doesn't
just, you know, simply go from hell, which has
a certain coherence as hell, we move to a
mountain, which itself is divided into three distinct and
quite separate parts. You know, anti-purgatory is probably the
most original part of Dante's view of the afterlife
because he creates an area which really doesn't exist
in the medieval tradition of account of the afterlife.
The placing of Eden next to Purgatory is again,
is Dante's invention and just simply the way in
which he envisages the world, he he, you know,
uh, a very close friend and colleague of mine,
Ted Cacci, who, With whom I've worked together for
many years and then we were colleagues at Notre
Dame, he's written extensively and very authoritatively more than
anyone, precisely on the way in which Dante views
and maps the world, not just the world within
which we live, but you know, so for instance,
the mountain that he locates, the mountain let's call
it a purgatory, uh, is an addition, so he's
actually creating, In inverted commas, the world, he's giving
us, offering his readers insights and a view of
the world which they would not have had without
reading Dante, but he goes beyond this because he's
also in Paradiso as he travels up towards Paradise
and Paradise, proper, Paradise, which is the, in the
mind of God and the seat of the blessed
and the angel, is only essentially in the last
4 canti, 30 to 33 of Paradiso. The preceding
is a journey through the medieval cosmos, through the
different heavens of the medieval cosmos.
OK, so before we talk about Paradis or paradise,
uh, you mentioned, of course, at the top of,
uh, Mount Purgatory we find the Garden of Eden
or the earthly paradise. I mean, do we have
any idea why Dante included it there, and how
does it differ from a Paradiso? I mean, uh,
what kind of progression do we find between the
Garden of Eden and Paradise?
That's uh it's a very good and interesting question.
Uh, THE reason why he there are, I would
say there are two primary reasons for locating it
at the top of the mountain, and I mentioned
both of them briefly, uh, in my previous answer.
One is the fact that he wants to highlight
the spiritual condition that this journey through hell, which
is a rejection of sin, of course, and then,
Up Mount Purgatory, which is a journey of spiritual
improvement. It's uh, so in essence, in the central
part of Purgatory, that place of, that's constructed around
the seven cardinal vices, Individual sins unlike hell are
not being punished. What's happening is that that disposition
within us, which leads us to sin in particular
ways, is being improved and rectified. It's being cleansed
and prepared. To Be made spiritually pure, so that
the person who has been cleansed, is able to
then proceed on their journey up to paradise because
once you're in purgatory, you're saved. In, in general
terms, you cannot be returned to hell. Uh, BUT
what you do, you have to go through a
process of spiritual cleansing in order to make yourself
fit to enter paradise. So Dante, by placing Eden
at the top of the mountain is highlighting this
return to a state of spiritual innocence, which is
what God actually wanted for us according to the
scriptural account and Christian theology. And then sin intervened
and we know what happened subsequently. Uh, THE other
reason is precisely that, the one I also mentioned,
the one that Dante is, because the poem has
this extraordinary breadth. Many people talk about it as
as an encyclopedic poem, a poem that includes everything,
a poem that would give its readers an experience
of the whole complexity of reality. So by locating
Eden there, he's he's offering people, you know, a
vision as to where he believes, in fact, it's
more than he believes, he claims that he was
actually there. Eden actually is. Now, the relationship between,
what is the relationship between the Garden of Eden,
the earthly paradise, and paradise itself. Uh, Is one
is that the earthly paradise is here on Earth.
2, it is not the seat of God, the
angels, and the blessed. It is still part of
our earthly reality, it belongs in some ways to
us, or rather it should have belonged to us,
if sin hadn't intervened, and in order for us
to reach God, And to know God, because part
of the whole debate around, you know, what is
it like in paradise was the belief that the
possibility that at least in part we would have
knowledge of God as well as knowledge of all
the blessed and of all the angels, etc. IN
paradise. And this is not a condition that we
find in the earthly paradise.
And so in Paradise, the kind of organization that
we get there, then takes directly from the celestial
references and the view of the heavenly bodies that
people had back in medieval Europe, right? I mean
the Moon and then Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn, and then also the fixed stars, the
Primum Mobilae and the Imperium. This is all from
uh the kind of view people, the kind of
view people have of the cosmos back in medieval
Europe,
the late medieval, yes, it was based upon primarily
the work of an astronomer known as Ptolemy. Uh,
TO which some Additions of Aristotelian elements of Aristotelian
thought were added, Yes, fundamentally the, It's a system
that has the earth at its center, and then
the different heavens that you mentioned, and then after
the primummobile, which was considered to be the heaven
whose influence affected all the other heavens and then
they, they saw the whole of the uh the
cosmos working through celestial, through celestial influence, and up
to there it's, it's not as, you know, The
problems arise with the Empirean. Is the Empirean actually
a, a heaven in the sense that the other
heavens are, or is it something completely immaterial outside
of time and space and place and exists exclusively
in the mind of God, which at the time
when Dante composes the Commedia, that is the view
that he has, uh, of the Empire in. Uh,
NOW, what's interesting, as I mentioned earlier, is that
in fact Dante only finds himself in heaven itself,
in the Empire Ian right at the very end
of the poem, that essentially what we have in
the preceding canti, that the the. The, the bulk
of the of the Paradiso itself is a journey
through. The heavens of the medieval cosmos, so we
are not in paradise. Mhm. What the reason for
this is. There are several, but the one that
Beatrice offers, because Beatrice by in the earthly paradise
takes over as Dante's guide from Virgil, uh, you
can see that beyond the sort of personal reason
of the relationship between Beatrice and Dante, you need,
you know, one can see why a pagan guide
would not be appropriate for the last part of
the journey. Beatrice explains that. As a special privilege,
God is allowing. Dante the pilgrim, the traveler, the
protagonist of the poem, to have an indirect experience
of what paradise is like. Now this is predicated
on the fact that as with most religions, as
far as I'm aware, probably all, it is generally
normally impossible for there to be direct contact between
the divinity and humanity, and that therefore, And the
Bible is the most. Obvious and well-known example of
what I'm talking about, the communication has to be
indirect, it has to be mediated so that we
can understand it, and the Bible fits into that
system, into that scheme better than anything else. So
we, so in the same way, in order to
appreciate the divine, we can only do this indirectly.
And this is also the case as far as
the pilgrim is concerned. Who in approaching paradise is
first given an indirect experience so that he gets
some understanding of the way in which the Empirean
is organized. Uh, ON another level, this is very
effective rhetorically. It's very effective ret because Pa even
the cosmos through which he travels is primarily, it's
like where in Paradise, sorry, in Purgatory and Inferno,
Dante is actually seeing souls, seeing the environment through
which he travels, etc. Once he starts traveling through
the heavens, essentially all he sees is light and
hears sounds. So there's a. An extraordinary reduction in
what he is experiencing. And that therefore this poses
obviously a whole series of problems of uh how
do you tell the story if all you can
do is talk about light. Now obviously a lot
of what the paradiso is is a reporting of
speeches, there's a an increase in in dialogue, and
there's an increase in the length of the of.
The speeches that are given inevitably to counter this,
Dante then throughout the Paradiso does all sorts of
very interesting things with light, images of light, the
souls that he sees as lights, sort of organizing
themselves into interesting shapes, from a celestial eagle to
a cross, etc. ETC. But fundamentally, that part is
very much a way of Making clear to us
as well, you know, that the experience of the
divine is progressive, it's mediated, it continues, he builds
up slowly to that moment when he enters the
empire again. Which itself of course is not what
paradise is actually like, because as a human being,
he cannot remember his actual experience of paradise. So
it can, that's why he can talk to us
about it. But there's a certain point when he
becomes, when he achieves union with God, he says
that's it, I can't remember anything. But everything, the
whole process is an indirect process. This is something
that there's often confusion about. At no point does
Dante ever actually claim that what he is reporting
is paradise itself. No, because he can't remember. How
can you remember as a human being something that
exists exclusively in the mind of God? Because if
you could, you would then have understood and in
a sense. Been able to find yourself on a
par with the mind of God, which, of course,
you know, uh, A a a a religious. A
person of faith like Dante would would would have
considered as absurd, even someone like myself who is
not a person of faith. Can see why, you
know, in terms of the way which we think
about God, why such a claim would be nonsensical,
you know, uh, and so Dante, you know, it
it make what's very important to make it if
you want, a text that is accessible and understandable
to us, whilst at the same time, revealing that
this was the way in which he himself, as
Beatrice explained, because you're a human being. You can
only understand the divine indirectly, and therefore this, you
know, as you're approaching God, you're indirectly experiencing more
and more understanding of what the Empire in is
like.
But in terms of the people uh Dante encounters
as he goes through um the heavens, I mean
there's the um, I, I guess, please correct me
if I'm wrong, but I guess that there's uh
a reference here to at least some uh virtues
because you can find the ambitious, the lovers, the
theologians and teachers, the warriors, the. Just, uh, the
contemplative. So, uh, as, do you think that there's
any kind of progression here as we find in
hell and purgatory, or is it just, uh, the
symbolism associated with each of the heavenly bodies?
No, uh, uh, there is some idea of progression,
uh. Where in the other two parts of the
afterlife as we've discussed, one can correlate what Dante's
doing to preexisting systems that whether it's Aristotelian ethics
or the seven cardinal vices, it's much more difficult
beyond the heavens themselves to correlate. The way in
which Dante. Sort of then organizes the souls, distributes
the souls is probably a better term, to, Yeah,
Christian systems that some people have seen relationships between
the four cardinal virtues and the three theological virtues,
and there is some merit to that, but the
whole system is much more fluid and flexible, uh,
and. The why are certain souls included in certain
heavens, it is normally on the basis of uh
astronomical and astrological beliefs of the time because certain
human behaviors were. Associated with certain planets, this is
most obviously with, you know, can be illustrated by
citing the example of the heaven of Venus, the
goddess of love, etc. SO we find the lovers
there. Now, the system there seems, you know, we.
The last group of sort of community of souls
that he meets are the contemplatives up in the
Saturn. In the heaven of the moon, which is
the lowest, we also find contemplatives because we meet
nuns there. People have dedicated themselves to the contemplative
life whilst they're still on Earth. So you've got
contemplatives both at the bottom and at the top,
so what's going on? What seems to be going
on is that the 1st 3 heavens. Uh, WE
talk about them in terms of medieval cosmological belief
as being within the shadow of the earth, i.e.,
the shadow that is created from the earth going
up to the sun. Once you go above the
sun and the sun itself, there is no shadow.
So that shadow suggests that something of, of our
earthly nature, of the fact that these souls. Yes,
they're saved, and that of course is wonderful and
fundamental, but also the way in which they arrived
at that salvation, uh, had elements that were problematic
within it. So if we stay with the lovers,
for instance, the suggestion is that in life, before
they turn their love. Towards proper ends that they
had actually behaved in a manner that was lustful.
So we have in the first three heavens, a
kind of souls that still find themselves within the
influence of the earth. Beyond that, the souls that
we move, It's, it's hard to think how the
why, why the whys, especially for an intellectual like
Dante. Should find themselves lower than warriors, but they
do. Or why the, the just, uh, you know,
should find themselves lower than the contemplatives. Now there,
of course, by putting contemplation at the top. Dante's
saying those those people who dedicate their life while
still on earth fully to God. Which is what
the monks that he meets there do, uh, are
somehow superior in inverted commas to those of us
who involve ourselves in more earthly activities. In reality,
all of Dante's writings, including the Commedia, tend to
be a celebration of people who are actively involved
rather than people who just dedicate themselves to contemplation.
But conventionally in medieval culture, the contemplative life was
considered to be superior to the active life.
Mhm. So how do you look at the roles
of Virgil and Beatrice in the poem?
Uh YOU know that. They're hugely complex, but to
keep things, you know, as. Accessible as possible, that
It Dante is. One of the things that we
haven't talked about at all really is, or just
touched on it in passing, is that the Commedia,
like all Dante's writings, end up, as well as
doing lots of other things, celebrating their author. Can
just think about it, this guy claims, not just
that he's gone on a journey through the afterlife
and had union with God, which was something that,
Religious thought of the time, thought truly exceptional, that
possibly Moses had achieved it, the apostle Paul had
achieved it, and now we've got this guy from
Florence, Dante Alighiri. Who claims to have enjoyed union
with God. The the the there's a kind, it's
not just that he goes on this journey, he
claims over and over again that God has specifically
chosen him to go on this journey. Hm. So
much of the poem is highly personalized. This is
true of all of Dante's works. He is a
one way or another, he is the protagonist of
all his works. And so why Virgil? Now for
a long time, and this goes right back to
14th century interpretations of the poem, Virgil was equated
with reason, human reason. What a human person. Can
achieve without divine illumination, as a pagan, Virgil could
not benefit from, Revelation, which only. So it shows
that it becomes an emblem of the extraordinary capabilities
of the human, which is one of the things
Dante celebrates. He thinks on the one hand we
can behave appallingly, but on the other hand, he
also recognizes the extraordinary potential that we have as
human beings and the extraordinary potential of human reason,
which of course he considered to be a gift
of from God. Now Increasingly in, I would say
especially since for almost the last 100 years, if
perhaps a bit less. We've recognized that although. The
element of reason associated with Virgil is important, it's
much more significant, A, that he is a poet,
and B, that he was a poet of the
Roman Empire. So Virgil, so what Dante's doing in
the same, you know, it's part of that exchange,
that part of locating himself within the tradition. He's
Virgil was widely considered to be the greatest poet.
With together with Homer, but the Middle Ages didn't
really know Homer directly, you know, they, but they
did know the Aeneid extremely well, and Virgil, in
a sense is everywhere, you know, and the, and
his poetry is everywhere. So what Dante's doing by
having Virgil as his guide is he's measuring his
own poem and his own poetic prowess against Virgil's.
And as you probably will have guessed, what emerges
is that his poetic ability, not least because He's
a Christian and because he's been chosen by God,
is superior to Virgil's poetic ability. And The Commedia
is superior to the Aeneid. On the other hand,
we should also recognize what an extraordinary gift Dante
has given Virgil, or, you know, in a, in
locating him as an active and positive force within
a Christian universe. And there are moments, especially in
Purgatory, where Virgil behaves as if he were a
Christian minister. You know, that there's, but and it's
part of this, as I said earlier, this exploration
of the relationship between the Christian and the pagan.
It's also a way of of stressing the the
validity of pagan culture. For the Christian world, that,
you know, that in a sense it's the, if
it to put it in modern terms, it's the
way in which, you know, some of us believe
in the lasting value, of course, it needs to
be adapted to the present, and that's what Dante's
doing. With Virgil, the lasting value of the classics,
and that's exactly what he's doing, he's showing, to
put it in in kind of slightly anachronistic terms,
that Virgil is still relevant, Despite the fact that
he'd written so many centuries before, despite the fact
that he's a pagan, he's still relevant for my
world, for my modernity in inverted commas. Right. Uh,
uh, IT'S also Virgil had an extraordinary status within
medieval culture. Uh, AND what, and that he's adding
to that status to that, what the term they
would have used was authoritity, in that he was
a great authoritas, a great authority. So he was
adding to Virgil's authoritativeness. Beatrice is, is. In many
ways, both less complex and more complex, less interesting
and more interesting. Beatrice, uh, as we know, uh,
first appears in some of Dante's poems and then
in the work that he wrote, there's some dispute,
but let's say in the mid 1290s that the
Vita Nova, the new life, in which he collects
some of his poems and then. Embeds these poems
into a prose narrative and a prose analysis, commentary
of his poems, in which there are 3 protagonists,
one is himself as the lover, 2 is Beatrice
as the beloved, and 3 is the god of
love, Amore. And so Beatrice is celebrated, and he
makes claims for her which are. Within the terms
of the way in which love literature and reflection
on secular love are developed, are innovative and in
particular what he does is he brings together Christian
ideas about love, together with secular ideas about love
and they're embodied in the figure of Beatrice, who
is presented as a divine emissary on earth, as
a miracle, as someone who has been sent specifically
to, Help the lover Aidante achieve salvation. So this
is an extraordinary claim he makes for this woman.
What's striking about the figure of Beatrice is. That
in the Vita Nova is that she doesn't speak,
she is simply known through her effects, and this
is an important point to keep in mind when
we start thinking of the Beatrice of Paradiso and
of the earthly paradise. Now, I'm sure the issue
that many of your listeners will want to know
is, was she a real woman or not? My
answer is I don't know. There certainly was a
Beatriza Plitinari, and Danti had connections with the Poltinari
family. Uh, WHEN he was still in Florence before
his exile in 1302, whether the figure is Bertricipoti,
I don't know. And in a sense it doesn't
matter because Beatrice, it's the name. Beatrice, bringer of
beatitude, someone who leads to salvation, that's what's important,
and it's all the symbolic rather than the realistic
values in the Vita Nova that are crucial. Mhm.
So what we can say is that if she
is based upon an actual historical person, and there
is no evidence at all other than what we
find in the Vita Nova, which is a piece
of literature, it's art, let's not forget that, that
Dante ever had any feelings for a historical figure
for someone called Beatrizapotinari. There's no evidence at all
beyond what we are told in the Vita Nova.
That what is what is much more interesting is
the fact that he should. Make such extraordinary claims
for a young woman in Florence, there's a kind
of elevation, however much we may feel uncomfortable about
the way in which he's reduced her to silence,
the sort of, you know, very much male oriented,
Uh, view of love that we get in the
Vita Nova, it's still extraordinary the claims that he's
making for this young Florentine woman, whether or not
she is Beatriza Pultina. Now when we get to
the earthly paradise and. Paradiso Shock horror Beatrice speaks
All of a sudden the silent figure of the
Vita Nova, largely known through her effects, largely known
through what. The lover thinks about her, so she's
placed in a, if you want a position of
subordination inverted commas, and the nova, suddenly explodes on
the scene and has a clear narrative identity and
power. She does nothing, if anything, it is the
pilgrim who is subordinated to her. The tables are
turned. And this is also remarkable, but what's even
more remarkable is. The Beatrice of the Paradiso, it's
not just she continues in her status of of.
Someone that has been chosen by God to help.
The Dante figure achieves salvation. She continues having those
attributes, but then Dante adds a whole series of
other attributes to her. So her level of complexity
grows exponentially, and in particular what is remarkable about
her, is the fact that she gives these long,
Technically complex speeches in medieval philosophy and theology, she
talks like a university professor. At a time when
university professors were exclusively male, the idea of a
woman, especially a young Florentine woman who died young.
To be talking as if she was. You know,
a professor at the University of Paris of Bologna
is remarkable, and this is an area where work
is now being increasingly done to recognize what the
implications are of having. Beatrice becoming a major intellectual,
not just a major intellectual through what she said,
but also institutionally. The kind of things that she
deals with belong to the world of the upper
reaches of medieval learning. So, as I'm saying, I'm
that's just, we could literally spend the whole uh
dissenter episode on each of them and still have
only scratched the surface.
Right, so I have two more questions. These ones
are not, I mean, the last one will be
directly about the comedia, but, uh, the next one,
where would you place Dante in the history of
Western literature?
Uh, I'm a dentist, so, you know, there's the
pacion Professionnaire oozing out of my ears. He's certainly
one of the. 3 or 4 major writers of
the Western tradition, and that's not just myself saying
that, you know, there's a, especially from the 19th
century onwards, this has been a, a fairly well
established view. I, I would argue that in fact
he is the most important. Uh, OF course I
would, but the reasons I, I think that I
would give is that he, in a sense, Opens
He, he, he, the way for the development of
literature. And the legitimation of literature in one's own
language. Of course, there were, there was, you know,
quite a significant amount of literature being written in
the vernaculars, not in Latin, but Latin culture predominates.
What Dante does is probably more than any other
writer. At the beginning of the tradition in the
vernacular. Shows the extraordinary potential of the vernacular, of
course he's using. His own vernacular, which is Florentine,
etc. uh, AND. That he shows that it can
do anything that Latin can do. But not only
that, what happens is the way in which people
react to him. So we have immediately Dante being
treated as if he was not just on a
par with the great classical writers, Virgil, Ovid, Cicero,
etc. BUT that he's superior to them. And what
this, the way in which I talked about authority,
Virgil's authority a moment or two ago, one of
the ways in which this authority was established within
the culture was given a kind of institutional status
was that commentaries were written on the works of
authoritative authors. Before Dante writes the commedia, there is
only very limited commentary on text written in the
vernacular. Once the commedia appears, there is an absolute
explosion of commentaries on the commedia. The whole field
of the 14th century comedies is a major subfield
within Dante's studies, because what happens is without precedent.
At that moment, it, in a sense it. What
I do, what teachers of literature do and have
been doing everywhere, in a sense we're building on
those commentators to the commedia, those commentators who wrote
a commentary on a work written in their own
language, which is what Latin literature, Greek literature now
is simply one particular area of the study of
literature. In Dante's time, it was almost exclusively only
that, and so what happens is that modern, You
know, the way in which we think about literary
study has its origins in Dante. The other point
I would make is a point that, not that
I make, but that was made by the great
Italian 20th century poet Eugenio Montale, winner of the
Nobel Prize, who in 1965, Uh, the, the centenary
for Dante's birth, Dante was born 12161265, died 1321.
In a lecture that he gave in Florence on
Dante, said, and I again slightly paraphrase and translate
from the Italian, he said, Dante filled up, I,
as if when we go and fill up with
gas at the gas station, and he said, and
he only left a few drops for the rest
of us. And this is a Nobel Prize winning
poet, and basically the point he was making is
that Dante's done it already, and he's done it
better. Than what I can do or than what
we can do. And there's this recognition of his
extraordinary achievement as an experimental writer, as someone who
is evident, especially from the 19th century onwards in
within, let's say the English language tradition, it's enough
to think of two authors like Elliot and Pound,
who are profoundly influenced and and depend heavily upon
Dante and recognize. The extraordinary, you know, originality and
impact that he's had. I think that within the
Western tradition, if we're fair, there's only really Shakespeare
that in a sense comes close to having that
same sort of cultural, both within high culture but
also within popular culture. Dante has an extraordinary reception
within popular culture.
Mhm. So, my last question then, of course we've
already explored here how the comedy is a deeply
religious text. So why would an atheist like I
am, I'm an atheist, I'm not religious at all,
why would an atheist like me who doesn't even
believe in the afterlife, doesn't believe in God, doesn't
believe in hell, purgatory, or paradise, and even some
of the sins that Dante. Includes in hell and
even perhaps in purgatory. Uh, I mean, I don't
even consider particularly moral behaviors like I don't know,
heresy or uh uh things related to people's sexual
behaviors, people who commit suicide and things like that.
I mean, why would an atheist like the comedy?
But I can't sort of explain why, why anybody
likes anything, I can tell you why I like
certain things. But but to put it in, in,
in slightly different terms, you know, why do we
read science fiction? Why do we read novels, it's
art, it's literature. And within literary texts we find
a bit of everything when we go to the
cinema. You know, we don't necessarily believe what we
see, you know, it, it's, what's extraordinary about the
poem is, Less if you want it vision of
the afterlife, although that's fascinating in terms of the
way in which he innovates on, you know, the,
uh, around how people of his time thought about
the nature of the afterlife, and his is a
hugely and radically innovative view of the afterlife. What's
extraordinary is he tells a great story, you know,
and it's a fantastic adventure story, starting in a
dark wood and ending up, you know, in. Embraced
by God, with all the adventures in between, it's
like that so many of the tropes of adventure
stories are there. This is why, you know, for
instance, video games were so easily made of the
journey through hell, because it's, it's great storytelling, I've
always told my students, think of it in the
first instance as a story. It then reveals and
opens out a whole world. You know, I think
it's in the one of, you know, it's in
somewhere in the Communist Manifesto, I'm not sure if
it's in all the different book but certainly you
you you know. There's this sense that the whole
of the Middle Ages, Marx and Engels, you know,
the whole of, you find the whole of the
Middle Ages, in the commedia, so it gives us
a kind of privileged peephole into centuries upon centuries
of our past, our past that still fascinates us.
Think of all the new kind of medievalisms from,
you know, Games of Thrones, etc. THAT we, we
still have now. Again, somebody, I think it was
a, uh, A Church of England uh minister who
wrote somewhere, and again, as with Marx and Engels
exaggerating, he said, well, if all other texts of
Christian culture disappeared, as long as we have the
Divine Comedy, we would be able to, you know,
reconstruct the fundamentals of Christianity. It offers us insights
into so many different aspects that are of significance.
And within our lives, you know, this why students
continue to flock to the commedia, you know, whether
in Italian or in translation, is precisely because they,
they find so much of it, it's the richness
of the text that and. And then if you
can read the Italian, it's the extraordinary quality of
the language, the inventiveness of the language. Every word,
and I don't, and I mean this seriously, is
just the right word in the right place, and
it's combined just the right way, beginning with the
combination of sounds. So that even if you don't
know Italian, you'll get something just simply if you
were able to read it out, out loud, because
you know, the way it combines with other words.
He was an extraordinary wordsmith, he didn't write very
much, and it took him about 15 years to
write the commedia. And this was arguably, you know,
the one of the greatest human minds ever, and
he wrote this relatively short epic poem, and it
took him 15 years to write. The the effort
that goes into it, it, it's uh, what people
appreciate is the what the extraordinary ambition, it's an
ambition which, if we're gonna talk about in terms
of silk, it's probably sinful. You know, because he'd
kind of considered himself to be the greatest, the
best, you know, I am the best. And part
of that's fascinating as well, to read something of
someone with that, not just that self-confidence, but he's
actually persuading you that, well, he might actually be
right. Mm
Yeah. So, Zig, let's uh wrap up the interview
here and look, thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a fascinating conversation.
Thank you, Ricardo, it's been a pleasure to meet
you and to have this chat. I always enjoy
talking about Dante, and I'll now get back to
the work I'm doing on, on Dante at the
moment. OK, all the very best. Bye.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloane Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.